Journal  of  Fashion  Business 
Vol.22,  No.6                   Purchasing  Behavior  of  K-pop  Idol  Goods 
—
ISSN  1229-3350(Print)          Consumers  in  Korea
ISSN  2288-1867(Online)
—
J.  fash.  bus.  Vol.  22, 
No.  6:1-13, December.  2018 
https://doi.org/                Yu  Jin  Kim* ‧ Jieun  Lee** ‧ MiYoung  Lee†
10.12940/jfb.2018.22.6.1
                                *CHIPS  inc.,  Production  Development,  Korea
                                **UBASE  International,  Overseas  Sales,  Korea
                                Dept.  of  Fashion  Design  &  Textiles,  Inha  University,  Korea


Corresponding  author 
—
MiYoung  Lee
Tel  :  +82-32-360-8137
Fax.:  +82-32-865-8130
E-mail  :  mylee@inha.ac.kr


Keywords                        Abstract

K-pop  idol,  Idol  goods,      Idol  goods  refer  to  products  such  as  cups  and  towels,  or  mementos  or 
fandom,  Idol  identification,  souvenirs  that  are  manufactured  to  gratify  the  desires  of  fandom  and  may 
purchase  intention             include  the  facial  images  of  a  star.  The  objective  of  this  research  was  to 
                                explore  the  purchase  behaviors  of  K-pop  idol  goods.  Two  hundred  and  sixty 
                                female  idol  goods  purchasers  in  their  twenties  participated  in  an  online  survey. 
                                Cheering  tools  were  the  most  often  purchased  idol  goods,  followed  by  idol 
                                slogans  and  dolls.  To  investigate  the  difference  in  idol  goods’  attributes  they 
                                considered  when  shopping,  respondents  were  divided  into  three  purchase 
                                groups  based  on  their  annual  total  expense  for  purchasing  idol  goods.  There 
                                were  significant  differences  among  light,  medium  and  heavy  purchasers  in 
                                terms  of  goods’  price,  practical  features,  and  scarcity.  The  light  shopper  group 
                                was  majorly  guided  by  price  and  practical  features  as  compared  to  the  other 
                                two  groups,  and  heavy  shopper  group  was  majorly  guided  by  scarcity  attribute 
                                than  in  the  other  two  shopper  groups.  The  more  they  identified  their  favorite 
                                idols,  the  more  they  worked  hard,  the  higher  their  income,  the  higher  the 
                                expenses  of  investing  in  idol  products,  the  more  likely  they  were  to  repurchase 
                                idol  goods.  In  term  of  post-purchase  behavior  of  idol  goods,  most  idol  goods 
                                purchase  by  fans  were  stored  rather  than  used,  and  few  indicated  that  they 
                                purchase  two  identical  idol  goods  for  use  and  storage.
2      Journal  of  Fashion  Business  Vol.22,  No.6

                  I.  Introduction                     Promotion  Agency  (KOTRA),  the  market  size  of  idol 
                                                       goods  and  idol  portrait-related  products  amounted  to 
An  idol  is  someone  whose  talents,  achievements,  status, about  75  billion  KRW  as  of  2014  (Yang,  2016).  It  is 
or  physical  appearance  are  especially  recognized  and estimated  that  the  scale  of  the  idol  goods  industry  has 
appreciated  by  his  or  her  fans.  Since  objects  of exceeded  100  billion  KRW.  The  items  being  sold  have 
idolization  come  from  various  domains  of  life,  sport diversified  to  include  a  variety  of  merchandise,  such  as 
champions,  movie  actors  and  actresses,  television cellphone  cases,  bags,  pouches,  key  rings,  albums, 
personalities,  pop  stars,  and  political  or  religious  leaders posters,  postcards,  and  cheering  sticks.  The  price  range 
can  all  be  idolized  figures  (Raviv,  Bar-tal,  Raviv,  & of  these  idol  goods  is  also  wide,  with  the  market 
Ben-Horn,  1996).  The  fandom  culture  of  Korean  pop showing  affordable  products,  such  as  a  cheering  stick 
idols  which  started  in  the  1990s  is  a  collective  culture priced  at  18,000  KRW,  as  well  as  high-priced  goods, 
formed  by  affection  and  enthusiasm  for  stars  (Bae, such  as  earphones   priced  at  over  1.2  million  KRW.
2012).  Over  the  years,  fandom  culture  has  brought  great    The  negative  aspects  of  fandom  have  also  been 
changes  to  not  only  consumption  patterns  but  also  the emphasized  along  with  the  long-standing  treatment  of 
way  profits  are  generated.  This  culture  is  a  complex fandom  culture  as  a  subculture  of  teenagers  or  a  culture 
media  product  targeting  the  masses  and  has  a  system exclusive  to  women  (An,  Kim,  Jeun,  Jin,  &  Chung, 
optimized  for  the  environmental  changes  in  the  media 2012).  Recently,  however,  fandom  has  no  longer  been  
industry  (Kim  &  Yoon,  2012).  With  the  development  of regarded  as  an  exclusive  phenomenon  among  teenagers  as 
digital  music  and  streaming  services,  it  is  difficult  to more  teenage  girls  who  have  participated  in  fandom 
reach  increasingly  high  break-even  point  in  the  activities  are  maintaining  their  activities  even  in  their 
entertainment  market  with   album   sales  alone.    adulthood  (Oh,  2007)  and  the  scope  of  fandom  is 
Accordingly,  management  agencies  in  the  entertainment expanding.  In  fact,  a  growing  number  of  studies  are 
market  are  seeking  as  many  ways  as  possible  to  generate reporting  the  positive  aspects  of  fandom  in  people  in 
maximum  profit  in  a  short  period  of  time.  One  of  the their  20s  and  the  possibility  of  fandom  as  a  type  of 
ways  that  is  drawing  great  attention  these  days  is  goods leisure  activity  (Kim,  2011;  Sohn,  2012).  Considering  the 
(Jung  &  Lee,  2009).                                 consumption  aspect  of  fandom,  the  market,  especially  for 
   With  idols  recently  becoming  mainstream  in  the  music adult  fans  in  their  20s  who  have  purchasing  power,  is 
industry,  the  K-pop  music  market  itself  is  experiencing too  important  to  be  neglected.  Therefore,  this  study  aims 
saturation.  In  the  entertainment  market,  management to  explore  the  purchase  behaviors  of  adult   K-pop  idol 
agencies  are  zooming  in  on  goods  to  generate  maximum goods  consumers  over  the  age  of  20,  an  area  that  has 
profit  in  a  short  period  of  time,  expanding  related rarely  been  discussed  in  previous  studies.
businesses,  such  as  opening  and  operating  on/off 
shopping  malls.  For  example,  SM  Entertainment  is                 II.  Literature  Review
operating  SMTOWN  COEX  Atrium  in  Samseong-dong, 
the  company’s  official  store,  which   offers  star-related 1.  K-pop  Music  and  Idols
content  products,  and  FNC  Entertainment  is  operating  a 
goods  shop,  FNC  WOW,  in  Myeong-dong.  In  addition K-pop,  an  abbreviation  of  Korean  pop,  refers  to  a 
to  operating  its  official  (online)  shopping  mall,  YG popular  music  genre  originating  in  South  Korea  and 
Entertainment  is  also  expanding  its  business  into  the encompassing  a  variety  of  styles  (Wikipedia).  K-pop  does 
restaurant  industry  with  its  brand  YG  Republique not  represent  a  song;  rather,  it  is  a  genre  that  “fulfills 
operating  restaurants  in  Seoul,  Jeju  Island,  and  Malaysia both  the  eyes  and  ears,  like  a  musical  production”  (Fhur, 
(Kim,  2018).  According  to  the  Korea  Trade-Investment 2015,  p.82).  K-pop  hit  songs  tend  to  have  “upbeat 
                       Yu  Jin  Kim ‧ Jieun  Lee ‧ MiYoung  Lee  /  Purchasing  Behavior  of  K-pop  Idol  Goods  Consumers  in  Korea      3

tunes,  family-friendly  lyrics  and  fiendishly  catchy  hooks” 1996).  The  adoration  of  celebrities  such  as  idols  is  a 
(“What  is  K-pop...,”  2016).  K-pop  songs  are  usually normal  part  of  identity  development  in  childhood  and 
paired  with  big-budget  music  videos  in  which  perfectly adolescence  (Giles  &  Maltby,  2004).  Studies  show 
groomed   girl  or  boy   bands   perform  flawless    that  the  idolization  of  celebrities  decreases  with  age 
choreographed  dances  .                               and  it  is  more  prevalent  among  girls  than  boys.  Girls 
   In  most  cases,  the  source  of  K-pop’s  popularity  lies were  also  found  to  place  more  emphasis  on  singers' 
with  idol  groups.  The  “idol”  culture  is  prominent  in  the features  than  boys  (Raviv  et  al.,  1996). 
Korean  entertainment  industry,  and  major  entertainment 
companies,  such  as   SM,  JYP,  and  YG,  audition,  select, 2.  K-pop  Idol  Fandom
and  train  teenagers  to  debut  in  groups,  such  as  girl  or 
boy  bands,  rather  than  as  individual  artists.  Teenage Fandom  is  a  compound  word  composed  of  “fan,” 
trainers  usually  spend  five  to  ten  years  acting,  developing meaning  “fanatic,”  and  “-dom,”  a  suffix  that  refers  to  a 
personally,  singing,  and  dancing  to  debut.  “Idols”  are domain,  kingdom,  or  collection  of  persons.  The  origin  of 
often  subject  to  strict  rules  regarding  their  personal  lives “fanatic”  can  be  traced  to  the  Latin  adjective  fanaticus 
to  conform  to  a  perfectly  managed  public  persona and   is  used  to  refer  to  a  person  who  enthusiastically 
(“What  is  K-pop...,”  2016).  From  casting  to  debut,  the loves  someone  or  is  absorbed  in  a  certain  field  (Reysen 
entertainment  companies  in  Korea  perfect  their  young &  Branscombe,  2010,  p.177).  Fandom  in  Korea  is  a 
acts,  encourage  them  to  get  along,  and  censure  scandals diachronic  cultural  phenomenon  that  has  existed  since 
(Ono  &  Kwon,  2013).                                 the  establishment  of  the  entertainment  industry,  including 
   An  idol  refers  to  a  person  whose  talents,  An  idol the  modern  movie  and  music  industries.  Since  the 
refers  to  a  person  whose  talents,  achievements,  mid-1990s,  when  young  idol  stars  managed  by  big 
status,  or  physical  appearances  are  recognized  and entertainment  companies  started  to  appear,  fandom  has 
appreciated  by  his  or  her  fans  (Cheung  &  Yue,  2000). been  enthusiastically  enjoyed  by  teenage  girls  and  women 
The  objects  of  idolization  come  from  various  domains in  their  twenties.  Fandom  is  often  understood  as  a  group 
of  life,  such  as  sport,  entertainment,  music,  politics, of  individual  fans  among  the  public,  but  in  the  field  of 
and  religion.  Thus,  pop  stars,  along  with  sport cultural  studies,  fandom  is  considered  a  kind  of  social 
champions,  movie  actors  and  actresses,  and  politicians phenomenon  and  cultural  practice  (Jung  &  Lee,  2009).
or  religious  leaders  can  all  become  idolized  figures    In  the  past,  female  fandom  was  regarded  as  a 
(Raviv  et  al.,  1996).  It  is  proposed  that  the  idolization subculture  exclusively  organized  by  adolescents   and 
of  pop  singers,  beyond  the  consumption  of  music  and many  negative  aspects  of  idol  fandom  were  expressed 
collection  of  basic  information  about  it,  which  also (Kim  &  Yang,  2013).  However,  recent  idol  fandom  has 
reflect  a  normal  appreciation  of  music,  is  based  mostly shifted  away  from  being  the  exclusive  property  of 
on  two  important  components:  worship  and  modeling teenagers  to  a  leisure  activity  of  people  in  their  twenties. 
(Cheung  &   Yue,  2000).  Worship   refers  to  an    Such  fan  base  expansion   can  be  attributed  to  two 
unusually  intense  admiration  of  an  idol.  This  can  be factors:  first,  fans  who  were  in  their  late  teens  when 
expressed  in  behaviors  such  as  actively  collecting their  idol  stars  first  emerged  in  the  1990s  and  continued 
information  or  items  related  to  idol  groups  or  trying with  their  fandom  activities  into  their  adulthood,  and 
to  meet  the  idolized  figure  in  person.  Modeling  is  the secondly,  the  idol’s  career  expansion  from  one  area  (e.g., 
desire  to  be  like  an  idol.  This  phenomenon  can  be music)  to  other  areas  in  the  entertainment  industry  (e.g., 
seen  in  imitating  idolized  characters  by  copying  an TV  dramas,  films,  or  variety  shows)  (Lee,  2015).  Even 
idolized  person's  outfit,  hairstyle,  manner   of  speech, those  who  do  not  know  idol  music  have  more 
and  behavior  (Cheung  &  Yue,  2000;  Raviv  et  al., opportunities  to  discover  idols  from  dramas,  movies,  or 
4      Journal  of  Fashion  Business  Vol.22,  No.6

variety  shows,  which  has  helped  expand  the  range  of 3.  Idol  Goods
fans  to  other  age  groups. 
   This  expansion  of  idols’  fan  bases  has  also  influenced Idol  goods  refer  to  products  or  mementos  that  are 
the  area  of  fandom  activities.  With  the  increased  number manufactured  to  gratify  the  desires  of  fandoms  and 
of  fans  in  their  20s  with  purchasing  power  participating include  the  facial  images  of  stars,  such  as  on  cups, 
in  fandom  activities,  it  has  become  quite  natural  for  fans towels,  or  souvenirs.  With  the  Korean  music  record 
to  make  donations  to  charity  under  the  fan  community market  shrinking  and  more  idol  groups  with  distinct 
name  or  the  name  of  the  celebrity  they  are  supporting, concepts  emerging,  the  entertainment  industry  has 
engage  in  social  activities  with  the  celebrity,  and  make  a undergone  a  change  in  its  business  structure  through 
“tribute”  to  the  star  on  special  occasions,  such  as  their having  to  deal  with  the  shortened  life  cycle  of  idol 
birthday  or  debut  anniversary.  Fans  are  increasingly groups  in  Korea.  It  has  become  impossible  to  counteract 
engaging  in  positive  activities,  such  as  collecting  small crises  adequately   in  terms  of  profitability  through  the 
amounts  of  money  with  fellow  fans  and  donating   it  to record  industry  alone  (Jung  &  Lee,  2009).  The  higher 
underprivileged  people  in  the  name  of  the  star  as  part  of break-even  point  and  shortened  life  cycle  of  idol  groups 
their  birthday  celebration  event  (Park,  2014).  Unlike  the resulting  from  the  shrinking  of  the  record  market  have 
fandom  culture  in  the  past,  which  was  led  mainly  by created  an  environment  in  which  the  entertainment 
teenagers  fanatically  idolizing  young  singers,  the  recent industry  is  forced  to  make  maximum  profit  in  a  short 
idol  fandom  culture  is  led  by  fans  in  their  20s  expressing period  of  time.  Under  these  circumstances,  the 
their  enthusiasm  by  “supporting”  the  idols.  Fans  have entertainment  industry  set  the  goal  of  establishing  a 
grown  out  of  being  passive  consumers  and  became  active revenue  model  to  generate  maximum  revenue  in  a  short 
producers  who  personally  manage  and  promote  stars period  of  time  and  secure  a  market  (fandom)  that  will 
(Jung  &  Lee,  2009).                                 consume  the  products  and  services  offered  by  the  model. 
   Many  papers  have  examined  the  impact  of  fandom Borrowing  the  “one-source-multi-use”  method  from  the 
activity  on  the  development  and  school  adaptation  of Japanese  entertainment  industry,  where  the  idol  industry 
adolescents.  Previous  studies  found  that  fandom   developed  early,  the  Korean  entertainment  industry 
activity  has  both  positive  and  negative  effects  on  the adopted  the  revenue  model  of  spin-off  products  by 
development  of   adolescents.  Teenagers  with  a     offering  numerous  products   related  to  idol  stars  or 
moderate  level  of  the  idolization  of  pop  stars  had highlighting  the  closeness  between  idol  stars  and  their 
good-quality  interpersonal  relationships,  a  lower  fandoms  (Jung  &  Lee,  2009). 
distress  level,  higher  life  satisfaction,  and  a  more    Idol  goods  were  available  even  in  the  1990s  when  the 
valuable  social  self  than  the  group  who  had  a  lower  or first  generation  of  idol  stars  was  active.  Stationery  shops 
higher  level  of  idolization  of  pop  stars  (Lim,  2002). in  front  of  schools  sold  notebooks  and  pencil  boards 
Fandom  activity  also  has  some  positive  effects  on featuring  portraits  of  idols,  and  entertainment  companies 
adolescents’   emotional  resilience,  which  is  the  ability (e.g.,  SM  entertainment)  have  even  sold  H.O.T.  fan  cards 
to  adapt  to  stressful  situations  and  cope  with  life’s and  necklaces  containing  the  DNA  of  each  member  of 
ups  and  downs  (An,  Kim,  Jeun,  &  Chung,  2013).  the  group  (N.  R.  Lee,  2016).  Nowadays,  a  variety  of 
Previous  research  reporting  negative  effects  regarding idol  goods  are  being  released,  including  mobile  phone 
participation  in  fandom  activities  revealed  that  strong cases,  cushion  covers,  key  rings  ,  clothes,  candles, 
fandom  activities  and  idolization  tended  to  have  a expensive  earphones,  and  official  cheering  tools,  such  as 
negative  impact  on  adolescents  ’  school  life  adjustment balloons  and  glow  sticks.  SM  Entertainment,  one  of  the 
(An  et  al.,  2012).                                  largest  entertainment  companies  in  Korea,  operates  a 
                                                       department  in  charge  of   planning  and  developing  idol 
                       Yu  Jin  Kim ‧ Jieun  Lee ‧ MiYoung  Lee  /  Purchasing  Behavior  of  K-pop  Idol  Goods  Consumers  in  Korea      5

goods.  The  company  has  opened  offline  stores  in  COEX, 4.  Idol  Identification
Myeong-dong,  and  Dongdaemun  in  Seoul,  Korea,  and 
displays  and  sells   various  goods  of  the  idols  or  artists Fandom  is  a  social  identity  that  a  group  of  people  have 
the  company  is  managing.  A  wide  range  of  idol  goods in  common  in  relation  to  their  favorite  entertainer. 
and  related  services  are  offered  at  the  SMTOWN  COEX According  to  social  identity  theory,  the  self-concept  is 
Atrium,  an  entertainment  center  complex  of  SM    comprised  of   a   personal  identity,  encompassing 
Entertainment.  In  this  store,  witty  products,  candy  with  a idiosyncratic  characteristics,  such  as  abilities  and  interests, 
singer's  character  on  the  lid,  and  jelly  featuring  the and  a  social  identity,  encompassing  salient  group 
singer's  logo  can  be  found.  Other  major  entertainment classifications  (Tajfel  &  Turner,  1985).  Individuals  tend 
companies,  such   as   FNC    Entertainment,  YG      to  classify  themselves  and  others  into  various  social 
Entertainment,  and  Cube  Entertainment,  also  operate groups,  such  as  organizational  membership,  gender,  and 
official   online  and  offline  shopping  malls  (Kim,  2018;  S. age  cohort.  According  to  Bandura’s  (1986)  social 
B.  Lee,  2016;  Seo,  2015).                          cognitive  theory,  a  person’s  identification  with  a  model 
   In  addition  to  the  official  idol  goods  sold  by (e.g.,  a  celebrity)  determines   how  likely  that  person  is 
entertainment  companies  that  manage  idol  stars,  the to  enact  the  modeled  behavior.  When  people  perceive 
market  for  “unofficial”  idol  goods  made  by  fans  is  also themselves  as  similar  to  the  model,  they  are  more  likely 
growing.  The  variety  of  these  unofficial  goods  is  as  wide to  enact  whatever  behavior  is  modeled  by  that  person. 
as  that  for  official  goods,  ranging  from  basic  items,  such Bandura  (1986)  believes  that  the  identification  process  is 
as  photo  books,  to  miscellaneous  products,  such  as based  on  the  viewer's  perception  that  the  model  is 
calendars,  key  rings,  USB  flash  drives,  memo  pads, similar  to  him-  or  herself.  In  the  case  of  a  celebrity, 
stickers,  and  dolls.  Allegedly,  the  proceeds  from  selling identification  may  also  determine  behavioral  compliance. 
these  unofficial  idol  goods  go  toward  indirectly The  more  a  person  identifies  with  a  celebrity,  the  more 
promoting  the  artists  through  donations  and  support likely  that  person  may  be  to  engage  in  advocated 
activities,  but  this  kind  of  commercial  activity  of  selling behaviors. 
goods  made  from  idol  photographs  is  basically  illegal,    Identification  is  also  used  to  explain  professional  sports 
infringing  the  idol’s  portrait  rights  and  copyright  (Yang, fans’  loyalty  toward  sports  teams.  Mahony  (1995) 
2016).                                                 defined  team  identification  as  “the  degree  to  which  a  fan 
   Meanwhile,  the  retail  industry  is  also  trying  to  develop defines  him/herself  by  the  same  attribute  that  defines  the 
products  through  collaboration  with  famous  idol  groups. sport  team”  (p.12).  Team  identification  has  been  used  in 
For  instance,  E-Mart  collaborated  with  SM  to  introduce previous  studies  as  a  determinant  of  sport  consumers' 
private  label  products  under  the  names  of  SM  stars  such impulse  shopping  behaviors  for  licensed  team  apparel 
as  EXO  and  Super  Junior  (e.g.,  Exo  Sonjjajang,  Super (Kwon  &  Amstrong,  2002).  Sport  team  identification  has 
Junior  Ramen,  SHINee  Sparkling   Water).  The  products been  one  of  the  major  psychological  orientations  with 
are  private  label  products  that  were  previously  sold  by which  sport  scholars  and  marketers  explain  and  predict 
E-Mart  and  were  newly  packaged  after  being  named sport  consumers'  behaviors.  The  higher  the  level  of 
after  stars.  Although  their  contents  are  similar  to  those consumer  identification  with  the  respective  sports  team, 
of   current  products,  their  sales  have  increased  by  an the  greater  the  likelihood  of  the  consumer  making  an 
average  of  190.5%  compared  with  before  they  started impulse  purchase  of  the  team's  merchandise.
working  together  (Kwon,  2016).  Despite  the  growth  in    According  to  previous  studies  on  professional  baseball 
the  K-pop  idol  goods  market,  there  is  a  lack  of  research fandom   (Kim  &  Baek,  2010;  Kim,  Kim,  &  Hur,  2010), 
on  consumer  buying  behavior  among  idol  goods     team  identification  has  a  direct  effect  on  team 
consumers.  attachment,  and  the  purchase  satisfaction  regarding 
6      Journal  of  Fashion  Business  Vol.22,  No.6

pro-baseball  licensing  clothing  goods  has  a  positive  effect star.  Based  on  the  previous  research  (Kim,  2011;  Raviv 
on  the  relationship  quality  between  consumers  and et  al.,  1995),  eight  items  were  developed.
pro-baseball  teams  as  well  as  the  team  brand  loyalty  of    Idol  identification:  This  refers  to  a  fan’s  perceived 
consumers.  In  this  study,  we  will  examine  other sense  of  unity  with  and  belonging  to  an  idol.  It  reflects 
consumer  characteristics  (e.g.,  demographic  characteristics, the  extent  of  the  psychological  connection  the  fan  has  to 
degree  of  fandom  activities)  as  well  as  whether  idol the  idol  in  terms  of  wanting  to  feel  close  to  the  idol  and 
identification  affects  the  purchase   intention  of  idol  fans. experiencing  the  success  as  well  as  failure  of  that  idol. 
                                                       Idol  identification  was  measured  with  eight  items  adopted 
               III.  Research  Method                  from  Mael  and  Ashforth  (1992)  and  Kim  et  al.  (2010).
                                                          Repurchase  intention:  This  refers  to  the  intent  to  keep 
1.  Research  Questions                                on  using  a  product  or  service.  Purchase  intention  has 
                                                       typically  been  used  to  predict  actual  purchase  behavior 
This  study  aims  to  explore  idol  fans’  purchase  behaviors and  has  been  a  reliable  indicator.  Repurchase  intention 
of  K-pop  idol  goods  and  factors  affecting  their was  measured  with  two  items  (five-point  scale),  such  as 
repurchase  intentions  regarding  K-pop  idol  goods.  The “I  will  continue  to  purchase  idol  goods  in  the  future.” 
research  questions  aim   to:                            Goods   purchasing  experience:  Questions   on 
   1)  Explore  idol  fans’  purchase  behaviors  for  K-pop respondents’  purchasing  experience  of  idol  goods  (e.g., 
idol  goods;                                           total  expenditure  on  idol  goods,  types  of  purchased 
   2)  Examine  what  product  attributes  idol  fans  place goods,  purchase  satisfaction,  and  post-purchase  behavior) 
importance  on  when  purchasing  and  how  these  product were  also  asked.
attributes  differ  depending  on  shopper  characteristics;    Demographics:  Questions  on  demographics  (e.g.,  age, 
   3)  Explore  the  post-purchase  behavior  of  K-pop  idol educational  background,  occupation,  income)  were  also 
goods  consumers  ;  and                               asked.
   4)  Identify  factors  that  influence  repurchase  intention 
for  K-pop  idol  goods.                               3.  Sampling

2.  Measurement                                        According  to  previous  studies,  the  size  of  the  adult 
                                                       fandom  (those  over  the  age  of  20  )  for  idols  is 
All  measurement  items  were  adopted  from  previous increasing  in  Korea  (Kim,  2011;  Sohn,  2012).  It  has 
studies  and  reworded  for  this  current  study  context  if been  reported  that  adult  fans  with  economic  power  who 
necessary.  All  items  were  measured  on  a  five-point are  over  the  age  of  20  are  actively  consuming  idol  goods 
rating  scale,  with  endpoints  defined  by  1  =  “very (Hong,  2014).  Therefore,  the  subjects  recruited  for  this 
unlikely”  to  5  =  “very  likely.”  The  definitions  of  each study  were  women  in  their  20s  who  are  currently 
variable  and  measurement  items  used  in  this  study  are  as involved  in  or  have  experiences  with  K-pop  idol  fan 
follows:                                               activities  and   purchasing  K-pop  idol  goods.  The 
   Attributes  of  idol  goods:  This   refers  to  what  is participants  for  the  survey  were  recruited  by  posting  an 
emphasized  when  consumers  make  purchase  decisions announcement  about  the  survey  on  online  K-pop  idol 
(price,  quality,  practicality,  scarcity,  and  design)  and  was group  communities  and  fan  galleries,  such  as  EXO, 
measured  with  six   items.                           SHINee,  BIGBANG,  and  Super  Junior  fan  boards  and 
   Severity  of  fandom  activities:  This  refers  to  the  degree other  online  communities  for  women  in  their  20s. 
of  affection  and  positive  feelings  one  has  for  an  idol
                       Yu  Jin  Kim ‧ Jieun  Lee ‧ MiYoung  Lee  /  Purchasing  Behavior  of  K-pop  Idol  Goods  Consumers  in  Korea      7

4  .  Data  Collection  and  Analysis                  responses  or  responses  without  purchasing  experience  of 
                                                       idol  goods  were  excluded  and  260  samples  were  used  for 
An  online  survey  was  conducted  for  this  study.  The data  analysis.  The  respondents’  average  age  of  23.8  years 
participants  for  the  survey  were  recruited  by  posting  an and  most  are  students  (66.9%).   In  terms  of  annual  total 
announcement  on  online  K-pop  idol  group  communities expense  for  purchasing  idol  goods,  39.2%  of  the 
and  fan  galleries.  Women  who  met   the  criteria  and respondents  spent  less  than  100,000  won,  33.1%  spent 
wished  to  participate  in  the  survey  were  instructed  to 100,000  won  or  more  but  less  than  300,000  won,  and 
follow  the  link  on  the  announcement,  which  led  to  the 13.5%  of  them  spent  300,000  won  or  more  but  less  than 
“Research  Information  and  Consent”  page.  They  were 500,000  won.  Detailed  information  of  respondents’ 
asked  to  click  the  “I  agree”  button  to  indicate  their characteristics  are  presented  in  Table  1.
consent  after  reading  the  information  and  agree  to    Examining  the  type  of  idol  goods  purchased  by  the 
voluntarily  participate  in  the  research.  Participants  who respondents,  it  was  found  that  cheering  tools  such  as 
agreed  to  participate  in  the  study  were  directed  to  an cheering  sticks  and  other  tools  with  slogans  made  up  the 
online  questionnaire  page.  Frequency  analysis,  factor largest  group,  followed  by  dolls,  stickers,  and  photo 
analysis,  reliability  tests,  ANOVA,  Duncan's  multiple books  (See  Figure  1).
range  test,  and  multiple  regression  analysis  were  used  for 
data  analysis.                                        2.  Reliability  Analysis
 
                    IV.  Results                       The  reliability  analysis  results  indicated  relative  high 
                                                       values  of Cronbach’s α :  .762  for  the  items  used  to 
1.  Sample  Characteristics                            measure  idol  identification  and  .760  for  items  used  to 
                                                       measure  the  severity  of  the  fandom.  Items  used  and 
A  total  of  283  responses  were  collected  through  the results  of  the  reliability  test  are  presented  in  Table  2. 
online  survey.  Among  these  responses,  23  incomplete 


Table  1.  Sample  Characteristics 

                                   Characteristics                                     Frequency  (%)
                                                    20-24                                163  (67.3)
            Age
                                                    25-29                                97  (32.7)
                                            Less  than  300,000  KRW                     72  (27.7)
                                       300,000  -  less  than  1,000,000  KRW            122  (46.9)
           Income                     1,000,000  -  less  than  1,500,000  KRW           26  (10.0)
                                      1,500,000  -  less  than  2,000,000  KRW           26  (10.0)
                                           More  than  2,000,000  KRW                     14  (5.4)
                                                    Student                              174  (66.9)
                                                 Office  worker                          31  (11.9)
         Occupation                               Professional                            20  (7.7)
                                                 Service  worker                          11  (4.2)
                                                    Other                                 24  (9.2)
                                            Less  than  100,000  KRW                     102  (39.2)
                                        100,000 – less  than  300,000  KRW               86  (33.1)
 Amounts  of  goods  purchased 
          annually                      300,000 – less  than  500,000  KRW               35  (13.5)
                                       500,000 – less  than  1,000,000  KRW               18  (6.9)
                                           More  than  1,000,000  KRW                     19  (7.3)
 8      Journal  of  Fashion  Business  Vol.22,  No.6


                               Figure  1.  Types  of  Idol  Goods  Purchase  by  the  Respondents


Table  2.  Results  of  Reliability  Tests 

       Variables                                             Items                                         Cronbach’s  α
                       I  feel  like  I'm  being  criticized  when  Idol  is  being  criticized.
                       I  feel  like  I'm  being  praised  when  Idol  is  praised.
                       Idol  is  called  "Our  OO."
                       I'm  interested  in  what  other  people  think  of  idol  groups.
  Idol  identification I  feel  good  when  others  think  positively.                                         .762
                       I  think  the  success  of  an  idol  is  my  success.
                       I  always  copy  the  hair-style  of  my  favorite  idol  or  buy  clothes  or  accessories 
                           that  he  or  she  is  wearing.
                       I  try  to  resemble  his  words,  actions,  and  thoughts.
                       I  always  go  to  concerts  and  performances  of  my  favorite  idol,  no  matter  what.
                       To  go  to  the  fan  signing  event,  I  buy  three  or  more  albums.
                       I  buy  the  person's  record  or  album,  or  DVD.
 Severity  of  fandom 
                       For  public  broadcasting  and  pre-recordings,  we  have  a  nightly  sleep  and  a  night.
       activities                                                                                              .760
                       When  a  new  album  is  released,  I  stream  it  to  rank  the  music  source  site.
                       Join  an  official  fan  club.
                       Collect  photos  and  videos.
  Purchase  intention  I'll  keep  buying  next  time. 
                                                                                                               .602
    of  idol  goods    When  I  purchase  items,  goods  will  be  considered  first.
                       Yu  Jin  Kim ‧ Jieun  Lee ‧ MiYoung  Lee  /  Purchasing  Behavior  of  K-pop  Idol  Goods  Consumers  in  Korea      9

3.  Product  Attributes  Considered  when  Purchasing  practicality  attribute  (p <.01);  the  light  shopper  group 
    Idol  Goods                                        placed  more  importance  on  practicality  than  the  other 
                                                       two  groups,  suggesting  that  consumers  whose  annual 
To  investigate  the  difference  in  product  attributes expenditure  on  idol  goods  was  lower  considered  the 
considered  when  purchasing  idol  goods,  the  respondents practicality  of  the  goods  more.  A  difference  between 
were  divided  into  three  purchase  groups  based  on  their purchase  groups  was  also  observed  in  the  importance 
annual  total  expenditure  on  idol  goods.  After  dividing placed  on  the  scarcity  attribute  (e.g.,  limited  edition)  (p 
the  respondents  into  the  light  shopper  group  (less  than <.001),  with  heavy  shoppers  responding  more  strongly 
100,000  won,  39.2%),  medium  shopper  group  (100,000 than  the  other  two  purchase  groups,  stating  that  this 
won  or  more  but  less  than  300,000  won,  33.1%),  and attribute  was  an  important  consideration  when 
heavy  shopper  group  (300,000  won  or  more,  27.7%), purchasing  idol  goods.
one-way  ANOVA  was  conducted  to  determine  the 
difference  in  attributes  of  goods  considered  between  the 4.  Factors  Affecting  Repurchase  Intention  Regarding
groups.  The  analysis  results  are  shown  in  Table  3.     Idol  Goods
   The  results  indicated  that  all  three  groups  emphasized 
the  design  of  the  idol  goods  when  making  purchase The  severity  of  fandom  activities,  idol  identification, 
decisions  and  there  were  no  significant  differences  among annual  expenditure  on  idol  goods,  and  income  were  used 
the  three  groups  for  the  design  attribute.  It  was  also as  the  independent  variables,  while  the  consumers’ 
found  that  there  was  a  significant  difference  between  the repurchase  intention  was  used  as  the  dependent  variable 
groups  regarding  the  price  attribute  (p <.001).  The  results to  determine  the  relationship  between  the  variables. 
showed  that  the  light  shopper  group  emphasized  the According  to  the  regression  analysis,  repurchase  intention 
price  of  goods  more  than  the  other  two  groups, was  significantly  affected  by  idol  identification,  the 
suggesting  that  consumers  whose  annual  expenditure  on severity  of  fandom  activities,  expenditure  on  idol  goods, 
idol  goods  was  higher  considered  the  price  of  each and  income.  Fans  with  stronger  idol  identification,  many 
product  less  .  Regarding  the  quality  of  idol  goods,  all purchases  of  idol  goods,  more  active  engagement  in 
three  groups  responded  that  they  considered  this  attribute fandom  activities,  and  a  higher  income  tended  to  have 
important,  showing  an  average  score  of  4.2  and  no higher  repurchase  intention  regarding  idol  goods.  By 
significant  differences  between  the  groups.  Meanwhile,  a examining  the  beta  coefficients,  it  was  found  that 
difference  was  observed  between  the  groups  regarding  the consumer’s  annual  expenditure  on  idol  goods  had  the


Table  3.  Attributes  of  Idol  Goods  Compared  by  Shopper  Group

        Attributes  of          Light  Shopper     Medium  Shopper      Heavy  Shopper
                                                                                                F
         Idol  Goods              (n=  102)            (n=  86)            (n=  72)
                                3.60  (1.007)        3.23(1.037)         2.82(1.079)
           Price                                                                            11.940***
                                     A                    B                  C
                                 4.58  (.667)        4.38  (.828)        4.28(1.091)
           Quality                                                                            2.807

                                3.20  (1.178)        2.95(1.217)         2.63(1.227)
       Practical  feature                                                                    4.746**
                                     A                   A                    B
                                3.12  (1.253)        3.91(1.070)          4.28(.859)
          Scarcity                                                                          25.973***
                                     C                    B                  A

Note.  Duncan  test  results  A<B<C,  ***p<.001,  **  p<.01,  *  p<.05
10      Journal  of  Fashion  Business  Vol.22,  No.6


Table  4.  Factors  Affecting  Repurchase  Intention  Toward  Idol  Goods

   Dependent  V.             Independent  V.              β             t           R2            F

                        Severity  of  fandom  activities .206       3.713***

                            Idol  identification         .268       5.264***
    Repurchase 
                                                                                   .419       46.060***
     intention
                     Expenses  for  purchase  idol  goods .364      6.748***

                                 Income                  .129        2.526*

**p<.01,  ***p<.001 

greatest  influence  (β  =  .364),  followed  by  idol                    Ⅴ.  Discussion
identification  (β  =  .268)  and  the  severity  of  fandom 
activities  (β  =  .206).                              In  this  study,  we  explored  idol  fans’  (those  in  their  20s) 
                                                       purchase  behaviors  regarding  K-pop  idol  goods  and 
5.  Post-purchase  Behaviors  of  Idol  Goods  Consumers factors  affecting  their  repurchase  intentions.  In  terms  of 
                                                       product  attributes,  light  purchasers  placed  importance  on 
Concerning  the  behaviors  of  the  respondents  after the  price  and  practicality  of  the  goods  and  heavy 
purchasing  idol  goods  (allowed  multiple  responses),  65% shoppers  indicated  that  scarcity  and  limited  editions  were 
responded  that  they  “use  the  purchased  goods,”  and  it important  considerations  when  purchasing  idol  goods.  In 
was  also  found  that  these  goods  being  used  were  mainly terms  of  factors  affecting  repurchase  intention  regarding 
cheering  tools  or  practical  products.  The  majority  of idol  goods,  respondents  who  identified  more  with  their 
respondents  (87.3%)  indicated  that  they  “store  the favorite  idols,  engaged  in  more  fan  activity,  worked  hard, 
purchased  goods.”  These  respondents  noted  that  whatever had  a  higher  income,  and  had  higher  expenditure  on  idol 
they  did  not  use  was  stored.  Among  the  reasons  given, products   tended  to  have  high  repurchase  intention.  For 
storing  the  purchased  goods  showing  the  highest  fans  with  more  experience  of  purchasing  idol  goods, 
percentage  can  be  attributed  to  the  nature  of  idol  goods, scarcity,  such  as  limited  editions,  was  an  important 
which  are  often  composed  of  products  that  are   attribute  in  selecting  products.  Thus,  entertainment 
impractical  .  Thirty-nine  percent  of  the  respondents companies  that   want  fans  to  continue  purchasing  idol 
responded  that  they  “display  the  purchased  goods”;  items goods  need  to  plan  a  line  of  merchandise  that  possesses 
such  as  photographs  and  life-size  cutouts   are  included the  scarcity  attribute.  On  the  other  hand,  since  new  fans 
in  this  category.  About  nine  percent  of  the  respondents or  those  who  do  not  invest  much  money  in  idol  goods 
stated  that  they  would  resell  the  goods  because  they  had place  more  importance  on  price  and  practical  attributes, 
bought  multiple  same  products  or  no  longer  liked  the merchandise  planning  should  reflect  various  price  points 
idol.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  few  (5%)  respondents and  product  attributes  depending  on  the  characteristics  of 
indicated  that  they  “make  duplicate  purchases”  of  one consumers,  including  reasonably  priced   and  practical 
product  for  both  use  and  display  or  both  for  use  and products  for  these  fans.
storage.                                                  When  examining  the  respondents'  behavior  after 
                      Yu  Jin  Kim ‧ Jieun  Lee ‧ MiYoung  Lee  /  Purchasing  Behavior  of  K-pop  Idol  Goods  Consumers  in  Korea      11

purchasing  idol  goods,  some  respondents  said  they  used studies  have  been  conducted  in  Korea  to  investigate  team 
some  of  the  products  (e.g.,  cheering  tools).  However,  the identification  and  its  effect  on  licensed  clothing 
majority  of  responses  indicated  that  they  would  store  the satisfaction  and  team  loyalty  (Kim  &  Baek,  2010;  Kim 
idol  goods  they  had  purchased,  confirming  that  the et  al.,  2010).
goods  were  not  bought  for  practical  use.  Additionally  ,    Although  the  idol  goods  market  is  growing  significantly 
five  percent  of  the  respondents  said  they  purchased due  to  K-pop's  growth,  little  research  has  been 
multiple  items  of  one  product  for  both  use  and  display conducted  on  consumers’  behavior  regarding  idol  goods. 
or  both  for  use  and  storage.  Some  of  the  respondents This  study  can  help  increase  our  understanding  of  idol 
indicated  that  they  resold  the  idol  goods  they  purchased. goods  consumers  and  provide  basic  data  for  planning 
Since  many  fans  have  shown  that  they  purchase  several effective  marketing  strategies  that  incorporate  knowledge 
of  the  same  products  for  use  and  storage  or  use  and of  idol  fans’  goods  consumption  behaviors. 
display,  planning  a  set  of  products  for  these  consumers    The  subjects  of  this  study  were  limited  to  female  idol 
may  also  be  considered.  Of  course,  even  without  these fans  in  their  20s  due  to  the  increased  number  of  adult 
set  products,  consumers  will  buy  their  favorite  idol idol  fans  in  Korea.  Therefore,  follow-up  studies  will 
goods,  but  planning  these  sets  for  the  continued  sales  of need  to  include  a  wider  range  of  consumers  in  terms  of 
the  goods  would  help  strengthen  the  fandom  in  the  long age  groups  and  genders.  As  K-pop  grows  globally,  it 
run.                                                   would  be  also  meaningful  to  analyze   the  characteristics 
   We  also  examined  the  relationships  among  the  fan’s of  consumers  in  different  regions  and  cultures.
income,  prior  purchasing  characteristics  (e.g.,  annual 
expenditure  on  idol  goods),  severity  of  fandom  activities,          References
idol  identification,  and  repurchase  intention  regarding  idol 
goods.  Fans  with   stronger  idol  identification,  many An,  E.  M.,  Kim,  S.  H.,  Jeun,  S,  Y.,  Jin,  S.  M.  &  Chung, 
purchases  of  idol  goods,  more  active  engagement  in I.-J.  (2012).  The  effect  of  fandom  activity 
fandom  activities,  and  a  higher  income  tended  to  have participation  on  adolescent  school  adjustment.  Social 
higher  repurchase  intention  regarding  idol  goods.  Among Science  Research  Review,  28(2),  421-446. 
these  factors,  it  was  found  that  consumers’  previous An,  E.,  Kim,  J.,  Jeun,  S.,  &  Chung,  I.-J.  (2013).  The 
goods  purchasing  behavior  (annual  expenditure  on  idol effect  of  fandom  activities  on  resilience  in  adolescence 
goods)   had  the  greatest  influence.  Since  idol  fans  with in  combination  with  gender  differences.  Studies  on 
high  annual  purchases  of  idol  goods  are  fans  who  are Korean  Youth,  24(2),  149-175.
highly  satisfied  with  the  goods  they  have  purchased,  it  is Bae,  H.  (2012). 팬덤을  통한  하위문화  자본  축적과  활용 
expected  that  they  will  be  highly  willing  to  repurchase [Capital  accumulation  and  utilization  of  subculture 
idol  goods.  Thus,  planning  idol  goods  for  fans  who  have through  fandom]. Proceedings  of  Korean  Association 
already  bought  many  will  want  to  buy  by  offering for  Broadcasting  &  Telecommunication  Studies  2012 
aesthetically  pleasing  products  and  constant  interest fall  conference,  (pp.  200-205).  Seoul:  Korean 
would  increase  their  intention  to  purchase  as  well  as Association  for  Broadcasting  &  Telecommunication
strengthen  their  fandom  in  the  long  run.  The  results  of Bandura,  A.  (1986). Social  foundations  of  thought  and 
this  study  also  confirmed  that  such  as  idol  identification action:  A  social  cognitive  theory.  Englewood  Cliffs, 
has  a  significant  effect  on  repurchase  intention  for  idol NJ:  Prentice-  Hall,  Inc
goods.  This  finding  supports  Kwon  and  Amstrong’s Cheung,  C.,  &  Yue,  X.  (2000).  Idol  worshipping  for 
(2002)  study,  which  pointed  out  that  sport  team   vain  glory,  illusory  romance  or  intellectual  learning:  A 
identification  is  a  major  psychological  factor   that  can  be study  in  Nanjing  and  Hong  Kong. International 
used  to  predict  sport  consumers'  behaviors.  Additionally,  Journal  of  Adolescence  and  Youth,  8(4),  299-317. 
12      Journal  of  Fashion  Business  Vol.22,  No.6

  doi:  10.1080/02673843.2000.9747859                    product   on  purchase  satisfaction,  team  brand 
Fuhr,  M.  (2015). Globalization  and  popular  music  in identification,  consumer-team  brand  relationship 
  South  Korea:  Sounding  out  Kpop  (Vol.  7).  Abingdon: quality  and  team  brand  loyalty. Korea  Journal  of 
  Routledge.                                             Sports  Science,21(3),  1402-1416.
Giles,  D.  C.,  &  Maltby,  J.  (2004).  The  role  of  media Kwon,  H.  H.,  &  Armstrong,  K.  L.  (2006).  Impulse 
  figures  in  adolescent  development:  Relations  between purchases  of  sport  team  licensed  merchandise:  what 
  autonomy,  attachment,  and  interest  in  celebrities. matters? Journal  of  Sport  Management,  20(1), 
  Personality  and  individual  differences,  36(4),  813-822. 101-119.
  doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(03)00154-5                    Kwon,  Y.  E.  (2016,  April  5). ‘엑소  손짜장 ’  ‘ 슈주  라면 ’ 
Hong,  J.  Y.  (2014). 팬덤문화  [Fandom  Culture].  Seoul:  잘  나가네    [‘Exo  Sonjjajang’,  ‘Super  Junior  Ramen’  are 
  Communication  Books,  Inc.                            going  well].  Hankookilbo.  Retrieved  March  19,  2017 
Jo,  S.  H.  (2015.  July.21.). 굿즈의  신세계 [The  new  world from   http://www.hankookilbo.com/News/Read/2016 
  of  goods]. VOGUE  Korea.  Retrieved  September  3,    04050828455921
  2016,  from  http://www.vogue.co.kr/2015/07/21/%ea   Lee,  N.  R.  (2016,  October  25). 90년대  문방구에서  팔았던 
  %b5%bf%ec%a6%88%ec%9d%98-%ec%8b%a0%ec%84               충격적인  물건,  DNA     목걸이  [Shocking  stuff  sold  from 
  %b8%ea%b3%84/?_C_=11                                   the  stationery  store  in  the  '90s,  a  DNA  necklace]. 
Jung,  M.-W.,  &  Lee,  N.-Y.  (2009).  Fandom  managing Munhwanews.  Retrieved  January  6,  2018,  from  
  stars,  entertainment  industry  managing  fandom. Media, http://www.munhwanews.com/news/articleView.html?i
  Gender,  &  Culture,  12, 191-240.                     dxno=27145
Kim,  H.  (2018,  February  2).  Evolving  idol  goods...a Lee,  S.  B.  (2016,  May  2).  Banana  milk”  key  ring,  “Exo 
  mixed  view  of  consumers  [진화하는  ' 아이돌  굿즈 '... 엇갈   earphone”...consumer-catching  ‘goods’  [마나나우유 . 키
  린  소비자  시선].    Sisa  Journal-e.  Retrieved  March  19, 링,  엑소  이어폰  ... 소비자  줄세우는    ‘ 굿즈 ’]. The  Korea 
  2017   from  http://www.sisajournal-e.com/biz/article  Economic  Daily.   Retrieved  March  20,  2017,  from 
  Print/179629                                           http://www.hankyung.com/news/app/newsview.php?aid
Kim,  H.,  &  Yoon,  T.-J.  (2012).  How  the  IDOL  system =201605020752i
  in  Korean  pop  culture  works  :  An  explorative  study Lee.  S.  H.  (2015).  (A)  qualitative  study  on  fandom  of 
  on  the  dual  structure  of  production/consumption  of 20's  women  :  focused  on  correlation  idol  worship  and 
  idol  culture.  Broadcasting  &  Communication.  13(4), romanticization  of  the  idol,  intimacy  with  the  idol, 
  45-82.                                                 self-esteem (Unpublished  Master’s  thesis).  Korea 
Kim,  S.-A.  (2011).  A  study  on  the  masculinity  image  of University,  Seoul,  Korea.
  male  idol  stars  and  the  construction  of  fandom Lim,  Y.  S.  (2002).  Adolescent  idolization  of  public  stars 
  identity:  Focusing  on  2PM  and  SHINee. Media,      and  psycho-social  adjustment. Korean  Journal  of 
  Gender  &  Culture,  19(9),  5-38.                     Youth  Studies,  9(2),  57-78.
Kim,  S.-H.,  &  Yang,  D.-O   (2013).  A  study  on   Mael,  F.,  &  Ashforth,  B.  E.  (1992).  Alumni  and  their 
  middle-aged  female  fandom  to  reality  competition  TV alma  mater:  A  partial  test  of  the  reformulated  model 
  Star. Media,  Gender  &  Culture,  25, 35-71.          of    organizational  identification. Journal  of 
Kim,  S.-Y.,  &  Baek,  H.-R. (2010).  The  effect  of  brand organizational  Behavior,  13(2),  103-123.  https://doi. 
  personality  and  identification  of  professional  baseball org/10.1002/job.4030130202
  female  fan  on  the  brand  attachment  and  commitment. Oh,  J.  Y.  (2007). Fandom  of  married  women  in  their 
  Korea  Journal  of  Sports  Science,  19(4),  691-702. 30s  and  cultural  politics  of  age:  Focusing  on 
Kim,  Y.  M.,  Kim,  C.  K.,  Hur,  J. (2010).  The  effects  of 'DongBangShinGi'  fandom (Unpublished  Master’s 
  the  attribute  of  professional  baseball  licensing  clothing thesis).  Ewha  Woman‘s  University,  Seoul,  Korea.
                      Yu  Jin  Kim ‧ Jieun  Lee ‧ MiYoung  Lee  /  Purchasing  Behavior  of  K-pop  Idol  Goods  Consumers  in  Korea      13

Ono,  K.  A.,  &  Kwon,  J.  (2013). Re-worlding  culture. Sohn,  S.  (2012).  Local  context  and  global  fandom  of 
  The  Korean  wave:  Korean  media  go  global.  London: hallyu  consumption  -   The   case  of  korean 
  Routledge.                                             connection  in  France. Journal  of  Media  Exonomics 
Park,  S.  J.  (2014,  August  1). 진화하는  팬덤 : 사랑을  사랑    &  Culture,  10(1),  45-85.
  으로,  기부문화  앞장서는  팬덤        [Evolving  fandom,  love  Tajfel,  H.  and  Turner,  J.  C.  (1985).  The  social 
  as  love,  fandom  leading  the  culture  of  donation]. 10 identity  theory  of  intergroup  behavior.  In:  Worchel, 
  Asia.   Retrieved   January   6,   2018,    from       S.  and  Austin,  W.  G.  (Eds).  Psychology  of 
  http://tenasia.hankyung.com/archives/290966            intergroup    relations   (pp.7-24).    Chicago: 
Raviv,  A.,  Bar-Tal,  D.,  Raviv,  A.,  &  Ben-Horin,  A. Nelson-Hall.
  (1996).  Adolescent  idolization  of  pop  singers:  Causes, What  is  K-pop?  South  Korean  music  goes  global  (2016, 
  expressions,  and  reliance. Journal  of  Youth  and   Aug.  8). The  Week.  Retrieved  March  21,  2017,  from 
  Adolescence,  25(5),  631-650.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ https://www.theweek.co.uk/75331/what-is-k-pop-sout
  BF01537358                                             h-korean-music-goes-global
Reysen,  S.,  &  Branscombe,  N.  R.  (2010).  Fanship  and Yang,  H.  S.  (2016). 한류의  핵심  중국  아이돌시장을  노려
  fandom:  Comparisons  between  sport  and  non-sport   라   ② [Go  after  the  Core  Chinese  Idol  Market  ② ]. 
  fans. Journal  of  Sport  Behavior,  33(2),  176-193.  Kotra  International  Market  News.  Retrieved  March 
Seo,  E.  N.  (2015,  December  14). 청소년  사로잡는  신종       20,    2017,   from    https://news.kotra.or.kr/user/ 
  등골브레이커 ‘ 굿즈     ’ 의  세계  [A  world  of  teen-crazy     globalBbs/kotranews/4/globalBbsDataView.do?setIdx=24
  backbreaker  'Goods']. MBN.  Retrieved  March  19,     3&dataIdx=148952
  2017  from  http://news.mk.co.kr/newsRead.php?no= 
  1177243&year=2015                                    Received  (June  28,  2018)
                                                       Revised  (August  16,  2018)
                                                       Accepted  (September  12,  2018)
